# Delay, Loss, and Throughput in Packet-Switched Networks

## Overview of Delay in Packet-Switched Networks

The most important of these delays are the **nodal processing delay**, **queuing delay**, **transmission delay**, and **propagation delay**; together, these delays accumulate to give a **total nodal delay**.

### Types of Delay

A packet can be transmitted on a link only if there is no other packet currentlybeing transmitted on the link and if there are no other packets preceding it in the queue; if the link is currently busy or if there are other packets already queued for the link, the newly arriving packet will then join the queue.

- **Processing Delay**: The time required to examine the packet’s header and determine where to direct the packet
  - typically on the order of microseconds or less
- **Queuing Delay**: At the queue, the packet experiences a queuing delay as it waits to be transmitted onto the link.
  - microseconds to milliseconds in practice
- **Transmission Delay**: Assuming that packets are transmitted in a first-come-first-served manner, as is common in packet-switched networks, our packet can be transmitted only after all the packets that have arrived before it have been transmitted
  - order of microseconds to milliseconds in practice
- **Propagation Delay**: Once a bit is pushed into the link, it needs to propagate to router B. The time required to propagate from the beginning of the link to router B
  - The propagation speed depends on the physical medium of the link (that is, fiber optics, twisted-pair copper wire, and so on) and is in the range of `2⋅108 meters/sec to 3⋅108 meters/sec` which is equal to, or a little less than, the speed of light
  - The propagation delay is the distance between two routers divided by the propagation speed. That is, the propagation delay is `d/s`, where `d` is the distance between router A and router B and `s` is the propagation speed of the link

#### Comparing Transmission and Propagation Delay

- The transmission delay is the amount of time required for the router to push out the packet; it is a function of the packet’s length and the transmission rate of the link, but has nothing to do with the distance between the two routers.
- The propagation delay, on the other hand, is the time it takes a bit to propagate from one router to the next; it is a function of the distance between the two routers, but has nothing to do with the packet’s length or the transmission rate of the link.

## Queuing Delay and Packet Loss

- `R` is the transmission rate; that is, it is the rate (in bits/sec) at which bits are pushed out of the queue
- Assume, all packets consist of `L` bits
- The average rate at which bits arrive at the queue is `La bits/sec`
- The ratio `La/R`, called the **traffic intensity**, often plays an important role in estimating the extent of the queuing delay

> If `La/R > 1`, then the average rate at which bits arrive at the queue exceeds the rate at which the bits can be transmitted from the queue. In thisunfortunate situation, the queue will tend to increase without bound and the queuing delay will approach infinity! Therefore, one of the golden rules in traffic engineering is: Design your system so that the traffic intensity is no greater than 1.

### Packet Loss

A packet can arrive to find a full queue. With no place to store such a packet, a router will **drop** that packet; that is, the packet will be **lost**.

From an end-system viewpoint, a packet loss will look like a packet having been transmitted into the network core but never emerging from the network at the destination. The fraction of lost packets increases as the traffic intensity increases.

## End-to-End Delay

More specifically, suppose there are N−1 routers between the source and the destination. Then the
source will send N special packets into the network, with each packet addressed to the ultimate
destination. These N special packets are marked 1 through N, with the first packet marked 1 and the last
packet marked N. When the nth router receives the nth packet marked n, the router does not forward
the packet toward its destination, but instead sends a message back to the source. When the
destination host receives the Nth packet, it too returns a message back to the source. The source
records the time that elapses between when it sends a packet and when it receives the corresponding return message; it also records the name and address of the router (or the destination host) that returns
the message.

Because the queuing delay is varying with time,
the round-trip delay of packet n sent to a router n can sometimes be longer than the round-trip delay of
packet n+1 sent to router n+1.

## Throughput in Computer Networks

Consider transferring a large file from Host A to Host B across a computer network. The **instantaneous throughput** at any instant of time is the rate (in bits/sec) at which Host B is receiving the file. If the file consists of F bits and the transfer takes T seconds for Host B to receive all F bits, then the **average throughput** of the file transfer is F/T bits/sec.
