# Protocol Layers and Their Service Models

From our discussion thus far, it is apparent that the Internet is an extremely complicated system.

## Layered Architecture

Imagine if someone asked you to describe, for example, the airline system. How would you find the structure to describe this complex system that has ticketing agents, baggage checkers, gate personnel, pilots, airplanes, air traffic control, and a worldwide system for routing airplanes?
Already, we can see some analogies here with computer networking: You are being shipped from source to destination by the airline; a packet is shipped from source host to destination host in the Internet.

Each layer provides its service by:

1. performing certain actions within that layer, and by
2. using the services of the layer directly below it.

### Protocol Layering

To provide structure to the design of network protocols, network designers organize protocols—and the network hardware and software that implement the protocols—in __layers__.
We are again interested in the __services__ that a layer offers to the layer above—the so-called __service model__ of a layer.

A protocol layer can be implemented in software, in hardware, or in a combination of the two.
Application-layer protocols—such as HTTP and SMTP—are almost always implemented in software in the end systems; so are transport-layer protocols. Because the physical layer and data link layers are responsible for handling communication over a specific link, they are typically implemented in a network interface card (for example, Ethernet or WiFi interface cards) associated with a given link. The network layer is often a mixed implementation of hardware and software.

- One potential drawback of layering is that one layer may duplicate lower-layer functionality.
  - For example, many protocol stacks provide error recovery on both a per-link basis and an end-to-end basis.
- A second potential drawback is that functionality at one layer may need information (for example, a timestamp value) that is present only in another layer; this violates the goal of separation of layers.

When taken together, the protocols of the various layers are called the protocol stack. The Internet protocol stack consists of five layers:

- physical
- link
- network
- transport
- application layers

#### Application Layer

The application layer is where network applications and their application-layer protocols reside.

An application-layer protocol is distributed over multiple end systems, with the application in one end system using the protocol to exchange packets of information with the application in another end system.

#### Transport Layer

The Internet’s transport layer transports application-layer messages between application endpoints.

In the Internet there are two transport protocols, TCP and UDP.

- TCP provides a connection-oriented service to its applications.
  - guaranteed delivery of application-layer messages to the destination and flow control
  - breaks long messages into shorter ­segments and provides a congestion-control mechanism
- The UDP protocol provides a connectionless service to its applications
  - This is a no-frills service that provides no reliability, no flow control, and no congestion control

#### Network Layer

The Internet’s network layer is responsible for moving network-layer packets known as datagrams from one host to another.

The Internet transport-layer protocol (TCP or UDP) in a source host passes a
transport-layer segment and a destination address to the network layer, just as you would give the
postal service a letter with a destination address. The network layer then provides the service of
delivering the segment to the transport layer in the destination host.

There is only one IP protocol, and all Internet components that have a network layer must run the IP protocol.

The Internet’s network layer also contains routing protocols that determine the routes that datagrams take between sources and destinations. The Internet has many routing protocols.

Although the network layer contains both the IP protocol and numerous routing protocols, it is often simply referred to as the IP layer, reflecting the fact that IP is the glue that binds the Internet together.

#### Link Layer

To move a packet from one node (host or router) to the next node in the route, the network layer relies on the services of the link layer.
In particular, at each node, the network layer passes the datagram down to the link layer, which delivers the datagram to the next node along the route. At this next node, the link layer passes the datagram up to the network layer.

Examples of link-layer protocols include Ethernet, WiFi, and the cable access network’s DOCSIS protocol.

#### Physical Layer

While the job of the link layer is to move entire frames from one network element to an adjacent network
element, the job of the physical layer is to move the individual bits within the frame from one node to the
next.

The protocols in this layer are again link dependent and further depend on the actual transmission
medium of the link (for example, twisted-pair copper wire, single-mode fiber optics).

#### The OSI Model

Having discussed the Internet protocol stack in detail, we should mention that it is not the only protocol
stack around. In particular, back in the late 1970s, the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) proposed that computer networks be organized around seven layers, called the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) model.

The seven layers of the OSI reference model, are: application layer,
presentation layer, session layer, transport layer, network layer, data link layer, and physical layer.
The functionality of five of these layers is roughly the same as their similarly named Internet counterparts.

- presentation layer
  - provide services that allow communicating applications to interpret the meaning of data exchanged
    - data compression
    - data encryption
    - data description
- session layer
  - delimiting and synchronization of data exchange, including the means to build a checkpointing and recovery scheme

## Encapsulation

At the sending host, an **application-layer message** is passed to the transport layer. In the simplest case, the transport layer takes the message and appends additional information (so-called transport-layer header information, H t in Figure 1.24) that will be used by the receiver-side transport layer. The application-layer message and the transport-layer header information together constitute the **transport-layer segment**. The transport-layer segment thus encapsulates the application-layer message. The transport layer then passes the segment to the network layer, which adds network-layer header information such as source and destination end system addresses, creating a **network-layer datagram**. The datagram is then passed to the link layer, which (of course!) will add its own link-layer header information and create a **link-layer frame**. Thus, we see that at each layer, a packet has two types of fields: header fields and a **payload field**. The payload is typically a packet from the layer above.

![Hosts, routers, and link-layer switches; each contains a ­ different set of layers,
reflecting their differences in ­ functionality](fig-1.24.png)

> The physical path that data takes down a sending end system’s protocol stack, up and down the protocol stacks of an intervening link-layer switch and router, and then up the protocol stack at the receiving end system. As we discuss later in this book, routers and link-layer switches are both packet switches.<br><br>But routers and link-layer switches do not implement *all* of the layers in the protocol stack; they typically implement only the bottom layers.
